= Rack::API

Create web app APIs that respond to one or more formats using an elegant DSL.

== Installation

  gem install rack-api

== Usage

=== Basic example

  Rack::API.app do
    prefix "api"

    version :v1 do
      get "users(.:format)" do
        User.all
      end

      get "users/:id(.:format)" do
        User.find(params[:id])
      end
    end
  end

=== Rails Integration

First, set up your Gemfile like this:

  gem "rack-api", "~> 0.1.0", :require => "rack/api"

Create your API somewhere. In this example, we'll add it to <tt>lib/api.rb</tt>.

  Rack::API.app do
    prefix "api"

    version :v1 do
      get "status(.:format)" do
        {:success => true, :time => Time.now}
      end
    end
  end

Load this file somehow. I'd create a <tt>config/initializers/dependencies.rb</tt> with something like

  require "lib/api"

Finally, you can set up the API routing. Open <tt>config/routes.rb</tt> and add the following line:

  mount Rack::API => "/"

If you define your API by inheriting from the Rack::API class, remember to mount your class instead.

  mount MyAPI => "/"

For additional examples, see https://github.com/fnando/rack-api/tree/master/examples.

=== Using RSpec with Rack::API

You can easily test Rack::API apps by using Rack::Test. This applies to both RSpec and Test Unit. See what you need to do if you want to use it with RSpec.

First, open your <tt>spec/spec_helper.rb</tt> and add something like this:

  require "rspec"
  require "rack/test"

  RSpec.configure do |config|
    config.include Rack::Test::Methods
  end

Then you can go to your spec file, say, <tt>spec/api_spec.rb</tt>. You need to define a helper method called +app+, which will point to your Rack::API (the class itself or your own class).

  require "spec_helper"

  describe Rack::API do
    # Remember to use your own class if you
    # inherited from Rack::API
    def app; Rack::API; end

    it "renders status page" do
      get "/api/v1/status"
      last_response.body.should == {:status => "running"}.to_json
      last_response.status.should == 200
    end
  end

If you want to do expectations over basic authentication, you'll have some like this:

  require "spec_helper"

  describe Rack::API do
    def basic_auth(username, password)
      "Basic " + Base64.encode64("#{username}:#{password}")
    end

    it "requires authentication" do
      get "/api/v1/status"
      last_response.status.should == 401
    end

    it "grants access" do
      get "/api/v1/status", {"HTTP_AUTHORIZATION" => basic_auth("john", "test")}
      last_response.status.should == 200
    end
  end

To reduce duplication, you can move both <tt>basic_auth</tt> and <tt>app</tt> methods to a module, which will be included on RSpec.

  RSpec.configure do |config|
    config.include Rack::Test::Methods
    config.include Helpers
  end

Your <tt>Helpers</tt> module may look like this:

  module Helpers
    def app
      Rack::API
    end

    def basic_auth(username, password)
      "Basic " + Base64.encode64("#{username}:#{password}")
    end
  end

== Helpers

Every Rack::API action has several helper methods available through the
Rack::API::Controller class. Here's some of them:

=== logger

Logs specified message to the STDOUT.

  get "/" do
    logger.info "Hello index page!"
    {}
  end

=== headers

Define custom headers that will be sent to the client.

  get "/" do
    headers["X-Awesome"] = "U R Awesome"
    {}
  end

== params

Return current request parameters.

  get "/" do
    {:message => "Hello #{params[:name]}"}
  end

== request

Return an object relative to the current request.

== credentials

This method will return an array container both username and password if client
sent Basic Authentication headers.

  get "/" do
    user, pass = credentials
    {:message => "Hello #{user}"}
  end

== url_for

Build an URL by merging segments, default URL options and hash with parameters.

  Rack::API.app do
    default_url_options :host => "example.com", :protocol => "https"

    version "v1" do
      get "/" do
        {:url => url_for(:users, User.find(params[:id])), :format => :json}
      end
    end
  end

== Useful middlewares

=== Rack::API::Middleware::SSL

This middleware will accept only HTTPS requests. Any request over HTTP will be dropped.

  Rack::API.app do
    use Rack::API::Middleware::SSL
  end

=== Rack::API::Middleware::Limit

This middleware will limit access to API based on requests per hour. It requires a Redis connection.

  Rack::API.app do
    # Use the default settings.
    # Will accept 60 requests/hour limited by IP address (REMOTE_ADDR)
    use Rack::API::Middleware::Limit, :with => Redis.new
  end

Other usages:

  # Set custom limit/hour.
  # Will accept ± 1 request/second.
  use Rack::API::Middleware::Limit, :with => $redis, :limit => 3600

  # Set custom string key.
  # Will limit by something like env["X-Forwarded-For"].
  use Rack::API::Middleware::Limit, :with => $redis, :key => "X-Forwarded-For"

  # Set custom block key.
  # Will limit by credential (Basic Auth).
  Rack::API.app do
    basic_auth do |user, pass|
      User.authorize(user, pass)
    end

    use Rack::API::Middleware::Limit, :with => $redis, :key => proc {|env|
      request = Rack::Auth::Basic::Request.new(env)
      request.credentials[0]
    }
  end

== Maintainer

* Nando Vieira (http://nandovieira.com.br)

== License

(The MIT License)

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
'Software'), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED 'AS IS', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
